Produced by Thorsten Kontowski, Paul Clark and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This

file was produced from images generously made available

by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

[

  Transcriber's Note:

  Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as

  possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation. Some

  corrections of spelling and punctuation have been made. They are

  listed at the end of the text.

  Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.

  Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.

  Text marked ^{thus} was superscripted.

]

[Illustration]

 THE SUN

 changes its position in space, therefore

 it cannot be regarded as being

 "in a condition of rest."

 _Si concedimus, eos, qui corpora in mundi

 spatio moveri eademque non moveri

 posse dicunt, insulsa loqui, praesumere

 non licet hominem astronomum talem

 sententiam elocuturum utque eam demonstraret

 operam daturum esse._

 By

 August Tischner.

 Leipzig,

 Gustav Fock.

 1883.

 Dedicated

 to all friends of Rational Astronomy.

[Illustration: _Nicolaus Copernicus._

_Terrae motor, solis stator._]

     The system of Copernicus is the only possible system; it is the

     eternal base of all astronomical progress, with this system the

     science of Astronomy stands and falls, and without it we must give

     up all explication as well as every scientifically founded

     predication. Hence it is clear that an astronomer of the present

     day cannot enter upon any other system, even by way of trial.

            Dr. _J. H. Maedler_. Popul. Astr. 1861. p.p. 48. 54. 62.

     _An army of philosophers will not suffice to change the nature of

     an error and to convert it into truth. Ebn-Roshd (Averrhoes),

     Arabian philosopher of the XII^{th} century._

Astronomical science, at the present day insists upon the system of

Copernicus, which, as is well known, is based upon the theory _of a

fixed sun_, and remains convinced of the incontrovertible truth and

importance of this system, even after it has become an incontestable

fact, that the sun changes its position; endeavouring to explain away

this discrepancy by the sophism, that the sun may be considered as _in a

condition of rest_. But the smallest movement of the sun overthrows the

entire fabric of Copernicus. Unless we take into account the

observations, made for the last 3000 years, respecting the movement of

the sun in space, it is impossible to comprehend the solar system and

its movements. Theory must take notice of the phenomena of the sun's own

movement and dare not cloak it under imaginary causes; for so long as

the motion of the sun is ignored, it is impossible to know thoroughly

the motion of the earth which follows it, and if the motion of the earth

be not known, it is also impossible to know the motion of the other

heavenly bodies, belonging to the solar system, as seen from the earth.

In a word, the astronomical theory, as it is now generally accepted and

believed to be the only and doubtless true, is wholly untenable,

requiring _a total and essential_ reformation; astronomical authors

cling to J. H. Maedler's assertion, that every body will understand the

impossibility for an astronomer of our time to enter upon any other

system even by way of trial.

If this theory be converted into a _dogma_, stagnation must commence and

all progress becomes impossible. In the history of science and its

advance, we find that there have been at all times new theories

propounded, which had often to be changed later on, or even set aside by

others diametrically opposite. The principal circumstance which renders

the system of Copernicus impossible, is that the orbits of the planets

_are considered as closed curves around the sun_. This view has

frequently been attacked; but it is maintained by astronomers, as it is

requisite for the elucidation of the system. Still it is evident that if

the centre of attraction moves forward the bodies attracted by it

_cannot move around it_.

Let us examine the system of Copernicus. Ptolemaeus first introduced his

system among the ancients. The earth was the fixed centre of the world

and around it moved the moon, the sun, the planets and the stars. This

system lasted for XV centuries.

The Ptolemaic system was modified by Copernicus, and the system of

Copernicus was simply the inversion of the Ptolemaic. The sun took the

place of the earth. In the centre was a fixed point (earth or sun),

around which the planets moved in larger or smaller orbits.

The main feature of both systems is that one of the heavenly bodies is

_stationary, in order that the others may travel round it_.

Copernicus makes the sun _to be motionless_, and the scientific world

bows before his authority. Then we have the recurrent curves, _closed

orbits_ (or ellipses) with their axes and their _invariable plains_; for

the planets _move round the centre of the fixed sun_.

Whilst however learned men were striving with feverish ardour to confirm

the system of Copernicus; whilst they were endeavouring to demonstrate

in every possible way and by various means clearly, _that the sun is

immoveable_: there came the discovery _that the sun moves_.

The astronomers of the past century proved that the sun not only has the

apparent motion, which every one sees; but that it also has a motion

proper to itself. Herschel commenced defining the course and direction

of it, and now-a-days no one doubts the truth of this fact, it being the

general opinion that not only the sun moves itself, but that nothing at

all in the world is in a state of rest. Astronomers, however, are of

opinion that this discovery is of _no consequence whatever as regards

the system of Copernicus, which is still considered by them to be the

most correct of all and the only possible one_. For more than a century

there has not been found a single astronomer or scientific man, to whom

it has occurred _that the motion proper to the sun, might have, in some

way or another, an influence on the present state of theoretical

science_. They all seem to regard _this fact_ as an accident, involving

no consequences and quite incapable of distracting them from their

labours, which they continue to work in the same manner as is indicated

in the system of Copernicus.

If an advancing motion is admitted to be the motion proper to the sun,

_the orbits traversed by the planets cannot be closed_.

But the question may be asked: is it true that science contradicts

itself in this way? We reply: Yes! astronomical _observation has

overtaken theoretical or explicative science_. _Theory has stood

still._

In order to set their minds at rest, learned men explain what they wish

to explain, and just as heavenly phenomena were accounted for according

the systems of Ptolemaeus, of Copernicus and of Tycho de Brahe, so too

there will be no lack of good reasons to account for the motion proper

to the sun; only history will tell us that the astronomers of the last

but one decennium of the XIX^{th} century have taught by writing and

speaking in their schools, that the sun is at the same time moving and

not moving.

A science which cannot make any use of this immense discovery, nor

deduce any application from it, does not possess any vital power; it is

a dead science, it is strangled by those whose duty is to keep it alive,

to lead it onwards to perfection.

Astronomers assert "_that the sun conducts its system with himself in

mundane space_," but in the same breath they add: "_with reference

however to the planets it may be regarded as in a state of rest_."

Hence astronomers have discovered _a motion which is at rest_.

If the sun is _not fixed_, the system of Copernicus falls to ground.

Either the sun moves, or does not; a moving sun in a condition of rest,

_is an impossibility_.

If the sun moves, there is _no fixed centre_, there are _no closed or

recurrent curves and no plains of orbits_. If these must be obtained at

any price, the sun must be definitively fixed, it cannot be permitted

_to move onwards and yet at the same time not to move_.

The fact that the sun moves, cannot now be altered and cannot be any

longer ignored; and if mathematicians and astronomers do notwithstanding

assert, that the sun may with reference to its own planetary system be

regarded as fixed, or in a condition of rest, in that the system moves

as a whole without any change taking place in the relative position of

the planets to each other, or in their relation to the sun; in fact

without any alteration taking place in the _configuration_ of the

system--we reply, this is one of those meaningless phrases, which should

find no place in a scientific discussion. _A body which is in motion

cannot be in any way regarded as being motionless_, it would be just as

reasonable to say that a locomotive, dragging a train of carriages full

of passengers, could with reference to the latter be regarded as

motionless.

The actual meaning of such an assertion is that the planets are attached

to the sun in such a manner, that they can neither approach to, nor

recede from it, but must follow it whithersoever it goes.

We may in thought pursue a train of hypotheses and suppositions, but

they do not thereby acquire reality; still, in a normal condition of the

human intellect, it is impossible to conceive that any thing can exist

and not exist at the same time.

From this confusion of ideas, it might seem as if theoretical astronomy

had got into an untenable position which is irreconcilable with science

and ought therefore to endeavour to enter upon a better state, as soon

as possible. _Theory ought therefore, either to have accepted as a fact,

the motion proper to the sun with all its inevitable consequences, or

else, to have denied this motion altogether._ But the astronomers ignore

this alternative, they have decided, once for all and irrevocably _that

the sun moves and that at the same time it shall be motionless_. In this

manner science loses its reputation and all learnedly technical

expressions and formulas are not sufficient to cover the weak part. _The

sun cannot be rendered motionless_, and if astronomers and men of

science of the present day continue to ignore this fact, they need not

be surprised at the inevitable consequences of their own acts.

The system of Copernicus presupposes the _fixity of the sun_, as a

"conditio sine qua non." The most abstruse investigations into the

"celestial mechanism" could not be made without this axiom be granted.

The mathematician must have a fixed point, a fixed central point of

action for his coordinates, he wants fixed invariable plains and closed

curves, a radius vector describing plains, he wants axes and poles for

the orbits, in order that they may describe certain figures in the

heaven, and that the plains of the orbits may move,--one of the other.

Naturally astronomers and men of science have never asked themselves the

question, _how a heavenly body could be fixed in space_.

When an astronomer asserts that the Copernician system is the only

possible, he believes that it is impossible for the sun to have any

motion of its own; when he at the same time asserts that all astronomy

stands or falls with this system, he believes that no astronomical

knowledge existed before the discovery of the Copernician system, and

with the fall of the system all astronomical knowledge will cease to

exist; he believes moreover true astronomy to be _that_, which men of

science have imagined to be the truth regarding the heaven and the

causes of the phenomena we see.

If astronomers had merely presented their ideas and opinions to the

world as such, and no more, no one could raise any objection; but they

lay down their opinions in words and on paper as a _positive science_,

they give their view as _incontroversible truths_, and _this fact_

alters the situation, for we cannot admit that science is a mere barge

to be taken in tow by the imagination.

The fundamental axiom of astronomical theory, such as the Copernician

system, Kepler's and Newton's laws, _are not derived from a knowledge of

fact_, they are the opinions, views, ideas and suppositions of

individuals, which have been adapted to the heaven, and as they were

generally accepted, the question was never raised whether the opinions

of an organic creature--however intelligent it might be--are really and

truly that which we term penetrating behind the veil of nature and

compelling it to yield up its secrets. The fact of no other ideas being

at hand which seemed to be better, sufficed to transform these opinions

into rules and to cause them to be accepted as the only admissible and

correct truths.

The opinions set forth by Copernicus, Kepler and Newton are designed by

astronomers of the present day under the collective title of the

Copernician system, and they believe that these three dogmas, systems

and laws, distinct as they are from each other, proceed consequentially

one from the other, that they mutually supplement each the other, and

thus form a harmonious whole. That not one of these things rests upon

actual observation or even probable and perceptible facts, and finally,

that none of them can be observed or verified, but that they are all

three creations of the imagination, must be clearly evident to any one

who occupies himself at all with the study of nature and more especially

with the study of the heavenly phenomena.

When we say that astronomy is an earthly science, we mean to imply that

the heaven and the phenomena there apparent cannot be studied otherwise

than as seen from the earth. Therefore astronomy is not a heavenly

science, it consists solely of such ideas as we are able to form, that

which we see on the heaven.

It is not astronomy that is grand, compared with the vast objects with

which it deals it dwindles to insignificance, and we may say that to

speak of it as being a science of the "heavenly mechanism," nay more of

the "laws of the universe," is sheer nonsense. The _universe_ must be

for us a mere term, which does not convey any tangible idea to our

minds.

As only a very small portion of the heavenly space and its contents is

visible to our eyes, astronomy--whatever may be the magnifying power

placed at its disposal--must be confined within the limits of our vision

and can therefore be no more than a small fragment.

In the positive sense of the word, astronomy is more especially a

science of _observation_, which is its _only_, but real and successful

power. It may be said that astronomy has raised observation to a

science, and its immense importance becomes more and more prominent as

the explicative science loses in value; which is the more easily

accounted for by the fact that observation will finally bring about the

overthrow of all untenable theories.

We see the heaven as we fly along, the earth whirls us with itself

through space, hence astronomy cannot make any drawing room experiment,

it cannot reproduce any of the heavenly phenomena, it can do nothing but

_observe_. If therefore the science of astronomy be more especially an

observative science, that which it does not and cannot observe, must be

for it as good as not existent. But astronomy may, in addition, be

designated _the science of observation of the apparent things_, things

as they seem to be, for it is unable to see or regard the heavenly

phenomena otherwise than they present themselves to it. _Astronomy is

not permitted to observe realities._

If therefore _observation is itself a science_, it must necessarily _be

the basis of theory_; observation may be set aside--which is what is

actually done--in this way we may plod on, we may term our labour what

we please; but whatever is produced in this way is not astronomy.

But that glorious science whose sublime object is alone able to unfetter

the mind of poor humanity--Astronomy--has a future before it. Any such

as feel themselves called upon to study _seriously_ the phenomena of

nature, may set about the task. _The sun is a sure guide._

The great mass of astronomical observations are almost exclusively of

European origin, those which in later times have been made in other

parts of the earth, are of a special character--they refer for the most

part to the stars and are not numerous enough to furnish any general

view, but here the question is of establishing a universal astronomy

available for the whole earth, which, founded on the actual type of the

phenomena, will become the result of science.

With respect to astronomical knowledge and its dissemination, the

discovery and proving of this type of the phenomena is of the greatest

importance, they must be found out not by calculation, but _by actual

observation_. When discovered, a large number of important and still

undecided problems will be advanced towards solution.

It may be asked: how and where shall we however find this _original

type_? and the earth itself supplies the answer by means of

its--=Equator=. No observer, placed either north or south the equator,

can see the two poles of the heaven at once, he cannot see the _whole

heavenly sphere_; at the equator the entire splendour of the firmament

passes before his eyes during the space of--12 hours.

The _equator of the earth_ is always turned towards the sun, and it thus

indicates the direction taken by our planet; therefore we must be able

to find this type _at the equator_. Either it is there, or it is nowhere

else, and it is indispensably necessary that astronomical observations

made elsewhere should be repeated at the equator thus as it were

confirmed.

The erection of small, simple and detached observations along the line

of the earth's equator, at certain distances from each other, and the

subdivision of the work amongst the various observers, according the

objects, would be of incalculable consequence, and would in the course

of a few years shed more light upon astronomical knowledge than all that

has hitherto been done at hap-hazard and without any plan. An

international scientific society could take the matter in hand.

Instruments of the most excellent kind are to be had in plenty, and

there is no lack of young and intelligent men. Moreover, ever since 1874

there has been established at Quito, the "Observatorio de Collegio

Nacional," the director of which Mr. G. B. Menton might superintend the

preliminary operations until such time as the work could be prosecuted

with greater resources and according to a well considered plan. Such men

as _Lick_, _Bischoffsheim_, _Remeis_ _etc._, who are willing to make

sufficient sacrifices in order to establish this glorious science upon

more solid foundations, which do not rest on an imaginary and untenable

theory, _but on actual observation_, will surely be found. Success

cannot be doubtful. Would not the Americans, who appreciate every

thing on a grand scale and are not afraid of any expense in their

undertakings, do all in their power to further and promote this splendid

work?[1]

If--as is well known--matters are not as they are assumed to be, to what

purpose have been and are these laborious works prosecuted and the

undying works written? If the imaginary is preferred to reality, we set

up an imaginary science, without knowing anything about the heaven, and

the science thus set up will become the plaything of fancy.

If they inquire, why theory denies reality--_the motion of the sun_--we

shall find that it is because it prefers the imaginary. _The sun in

motion_ destroys the found illusions of the astronomers, this they will

not submit to, their _untenable theory_ must continue to be looked upon

as unadulteratest truth, and the consequence is that the manifestations

of the grand and sublime Nature are put down as lies.

This idea _of a fixed sun_ has taken such a firm hold of men's minds

that there is no force in nature capable of exercising sufficient power

to eradicate it, the sun may move as it pleases, and whilst the whither

and rapidity of its motion are diligently studied, men's minds are

occupied _with its fixity_, and these "investigations and inquiries" are

prosecuted without any consequences being therefrom deduced. Directly a

theory or a law is to be set up, the sun is at once _very firmly fixed_

on--=ether=. Astronomical writers consider that they have done quite

enough, when they have accorded honorable mention to the motion of the

sun, _but their deductions, conclusions, theories, proofs and laws are

all based on the immobility of the sun, according the system of

Copernicus_.

The idea _that the motion of the sun_ does not necessitate any

alteration in the system of Copernicus leads us to the utmost absurdity.

If the earth is to move in the _invariable plain of its recurrent and

closed ellipse_, it stands to reason, it cannot follow the sun, and the

"circulation around the centre" at once falls to the ground.

It is a very remarkable fact, that the astronomers of the by-gone

century could, and those of the present century can believe, such as

Copernicus, Kepler and Newton, had they been aware of the motion of the

sun, would have set up the same system, the same laws and theories, _as

they based exclusively on the theory of its being immoveable_. This fact

is one of which we are right to be ashamed.

The astronomers hug themselves, with great complacency, with the

idea--which gradually becomes a delicious certainly--that they have

mapped out the heaven very well, and that any change in the arrangement

is a thing not to be thought of. If therefore any one of their fellows

should get up--which has sometimes occurred--and say: "it is high time

that we should clear up the science and subject this untenable theory to

a strict examination and test," the immense majority of facultists and

authorities proclaim unanimously "=non possumus=," which is after all

but a lingual verification of the first law of the nature[2].

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is it that the astronomers of the present day are unwilling to take

into consideration and to study the consequences arising from the motion

proper to the sun, with reference to its own system?

Why is it that they are unwilling to recognise or rather to grasp

properly and to explain the apperceivable phenomena, which the motion

proper to the sun, as seen from the surface of the earth, must produce

on the apparently hollow sphere of the heaven?

     Monter d'une echoppe a un palais, c'est rare et beau; monter de

     l'erreur a la verite, c'est plus rare et c'est plus beau.

                                                _Victor Hugo._

     Il arrive frequemment que la croyance universelle d'un siecle,

     croyance dont il n'etait donne a personne de s'affranchir a moins

     d'un effort extraordinaire de genie et de courage, devient pour un

     autre siecle une absurdite si palpable qu'on n'a plus qu'a

     s'etonner qu'elle ait pu jamais prevaloir.

                                                _N. Tschernychewsky._

Litterature.

  1. =Sta, sol, ne moveare.= _August Tischner._ Leipzig 1881-1882.

     Gustav Fock.

  2. =Groesse, Entfernung und Masse der Sonne.= _August Tischner._

     Leipzig 1882. Gustav Fock.

  3. =Die Sonne und die Astronomie.= _K. Nagy._ Leipzig 1866. F. A.

     Brockhaus.

  4. =Memoire sur le systeme solaire et sur l'explication des phenomenes

     celestes.= _Charles Nagy._ Paris 1862. Leibner.

  5. =Consideration sur les cometes, elements de Cometologie.= _Charles

     Nagy._ Paris 1862. Leibner.

  6. =Systeme solaire d'apres la marche reelle du Soleil.= _E. G.

     Fahrner._ Paris 2^{me} ed. 1869.

  7. =Das wahre Sonnensystem.= Bewegung und Bahnen der Gestirne nach

     einer neuen Auffassung ueber dieselben im Himmelsraume, und zwar

     welche nicht in Ellipsen statt hat. _James Hermann Milberg._

     Muenchen 1862.

  8. =Die wahre Gestalt der Planeten- und Kometenbahnen.= _Friedrick

     Carl Gustav Stieber._ Dresden 1864.

  9. =Die Sonne bewegt sich.= Folgerungen aus dieser Lehre in Bezug auf

     die Fixsterne und Planeten. _C. R.(ohrbach)._ Berlin 1852.

 10. =Ueber Veranschaulichungsmittel fuer mathematische Geographie.=

     Erlaeuternde Beigabe zu neu construirten Veranschaulichungsapparaten

     fuer Volksschulen und hoehere Unterrichtsanstalten. _F. A.

     Pueschmann_, Seminaroberlehrer, Grimma.

 11. =Der Himmels-Mechanik gaenzliche Reform auf Grund der inductiven

     Logik= mit der strengberechtigten philosophischen und mathematischen

     Nachweisung. _V. P. Kluk-Kluczycky._ 1880.

  G. KREYSING, LEIPZIG.

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Moreover, other, smaller detached observatories, might be erected on

the east and west coasts of America and Africa, on the islands of

Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes and Gilolo, on one of the islands of Gilbert's

archipelago and upon one of the Gallopagos islands, if it be considered

worth the effort to acquire some real knowledge as to the movement in

space of the leader of our planetary system and the bodies pertaining to

it.

[2] Inertia is the most simple and most natural (sic) law of nature

which can be imagined. Laplace I p. 4.

[

  The following is a list of changes made to the original.

  The first line is the original line, the second the changed one.

  Copernicus makes the sun _to be motienless_,

  Copernicus makes the sun _to be motionless_,

  mauner as is indicated in the system of

  manner as is indicated in the system of

  ideas being at hand which seemed be to better,

  ideas being at hand which seemed to be better,

  power. If may be said that astronomy has

  power. It may be said that astronomy has

  upon to sludy _seriously_ the phenomena of

  upon to study _seriously_ the phenomena of

  for the whole earth, which, founded of the

  for the whole earth, which, founded on the

  and the subdivision of the work amangst the

  and the subdivision of the work amongst the

  If the imaginary is prefered to reality, we

  If the imaginary is preferred to reality, we

  Celebes and Gilolo, on one of the islands ol Gilbert's

  Celebes and Gilolo, on one of the islands of Gilbert's

  or rather to graph propery and to explain

  or rather to grasp properly and to explain

]

***