Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed

Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was

produced from images made available by the HathiTrust

Digital Library.)

                            College Bulletin

                       COLLEGE OF INDUSTRIAL ARTS

                      THE STATE COLLEGE FOR WOMEN

                             DENTON, TEXAS

                      APPROPRIATE CLOTHES FOR THE

                            HIGH SCHOOL GIRL

                                   BY

                         VIRGINIA M. ALEXANDER

                                DIRECTOR

                         DEPARTMENT OF FINE AND

                              APPLIED ART

APPROPRIATE CLOTHES FOR THE HIGH SCHOOL GIRL

Some one asked recently, "Why all this agitation on the subject of high

school girls' dress?" Interest in this subject has certainly increased

during the last several years and the high school girl herself is

directly responsible for this interest.

It has been said that no great evil exists but contains the seeds of its

own cure.

The costumes worn to school by the high school girls of our country have

been gradually going from bad to worse with the years. Mothers and

teachers have striven to do what they could to correct matters but not

until the girls themselves realized that this great weakness existed,

and they resolved to seek a cure, were real results noticeable.

The representative high school girls of our country are making a stand

for good taste and democracy in the clothes they wear to school.

This little bulletin is published with the hope that its suggestions may

be of value to those students who truly desire to raise the standards of

dress among the girls of their school.

EXTENSION SERVICE

ADVISORY FACULTY COMMITTEE ON EXTENSION SERVICE

F. M. Bralley, _President of the College_.

Virginia M. Alexander, _Director_, Department of Fine and Applied Art.

Lena Bumpas, _Supervisor_, Teacher-Training Vocational Home Economics.

Margaret Gleason, _Director_, Department of Household Arts.

Mamie W. Walker, _Assistant Professor_, Department of English.

A STAFF OF COMPETENT LECTURERS AND EXTENSION WORKERS FROM THE REGULAR

FACULTY

Requests for Extension Service should be addressed to

    Lillian Humphries,

    _Secretary_, Department of Extension,

    College of Industrial Arts,

    Denton, Texas.

NUMBER 74--FEBRUARY 1, 1920

Issued monthly by the College of Industrial Arts, Denton, Texas.

Entered December 17, 1917, Denton, Texas, as second-class matter, under

Act of Congress, August 24, 1912.

APPROPRIATE CLOTHES FOR THE HIGH SCHOOL GIRL

Many a girl feels, when she first enters high school, that she is a

child no longer. She has suddenly become a woman, and she must

demonstrate this fact to the world immediately by her clothes.

Gingham dresses, middies, and low-heel shoes are scorned as belonging to

the days that are gone. Hair once lovely for its natural beauty and

simplicity takes on fearful and wonderful lines. French heels only are

to be considered and a georgette blouse with elaborate camisole or a

silk dress is an absolute necessity. With these acquisitions our young

lady is ready for her new undertaking.

Could she possibly make a greater mistake? The school room is not a

style show, nor a social function, but it is a busy workshop where

material is to be assembled from which to build a life.

In a truly good high school, of all places, a student must do or die,

and there is no time here to be wasted on thoughts of frills and

furbelows. School room walls and blackboards do not make consistent

backgrounds for party clothes.

In the past the high school girl who was considered well-dressed by her

associates was the one who was elaborately dressed. Now, since the girls

of our country are interested in all the big world issues of the day and

have taken efficiency as their watchword the girl who is a leader is the

girl who can _do_, not the girl who can _dress_.

One of the surest tests of good judgment and refinement in a girl is her

selection of clothes.

The overdressed girl does not belong to the wealthiest and most cultured

families as a rule. She is often striving to attain a social goal not

yet realized and the school room and the street offer her only

opportunities to show her fine feathers.

Suggestions for the School Dress

If a girl should not wear fanciful clothes to school just what, then,

should she wear? In a general way I will answer that question.

A high school girl should wear dresses made of good, substantial

material, appropriate for its wearing quality and interesting for its

color and texture.

These dresses should be made on lines becoming to the individual girl

who is to wear the dress, and at the same time designed so that they

will stand the wear and tear to which they will be subjected.

Dangling tassels, sashes, and fluffy ruffles divert the attention of

both the wearer and the observer and by their very inappropriateness

make the owner conspicuous. Above all, the school dress, which is a work

dress, should allow the wearer free use of her limbs and muscles and

should promote her general good health.

A school girl in a dress built on the lines of a Peter Thompson or

Hofflin suit with proper accessories in the way of shoes, stockings, and

coiffure has much more style than her little sister in georgette or

velvet. This type of suit is becoming to almost any girl as the collar,

tie, and belt may be varied to suit each individual, and the design has

become almost as staple as flour and sugar in the pantry. As a result,

these dresses, made of good material, may be worn for several years

without going out of style.

Ready-made suits of this type are quite expensive but patterns are

easily secured and any one who sews may make a successful garment if a

little care is exercised.

Gingham, linen, and percale dresses built on simple lines so that they

may be laundered without becoming stretched and misshapen, are always

satisfactory and pleasing.

In cold weather serge and tricatine make splendid but expensive

substitutes for the washable materials.

[Illustration: APPROPRIATE SCHOOL DRESSES]

The Dress with a Washable Underblouse

The linen or serge jumper dress, made with a washable underblouse, is a

most satisfactory garment for the school dress. It is not only

utilitarian but it is also comfortable and attractive on account of its

many possible variations. It is becoming to almost all types of girls

from the very young girl, often found in the first year of high school,

to the dignified senior.

The dress proper, built on simple lines, will stand hard wear and the

fact that the underblouse may be laundered or changed will give

freshness and variety to the costume.

The very young girl who has not learned to care successfully for her

wristbands will find this feature most valuable. In warm climates or

overheated school rooms the light weight of the underblouse will prove

very comfortable.

This dress made of wool may be worn quite late in the spring and a silk

blouse will be most useful for the winter months. Made of gingham or

linen the dress will be a valuable asset in the summer wardrobe,

particularly in the South.

Georgette crepe is not an appropriate material for this undergarment or

for any other school garment. Its perishable nature and its transparency

make it prohibited for the school room. A very transparent outer garment

demands a most carefully selected under garment and more often than not

this care is not wisely exercised by the wearer.

A white shirt waist and dark skirt is a very utilitarian combination,

but from an art standpoint it is not considered good design. For a

costume to possess art quality it must have unity; the wearer and her

clothes should create an impression of "oneness."

The sudden change at the waist line from a light waist to a dark skirt

cuts the figure into two parts, destroying this much-desired quality of

unity.

[Illustration: JUMPER DRESSES FOR THE VERY YOUNG HIGH SCHOOL GIRL]

The Proper Use of Line About the Face

The truly well-dressed girl and the one who displays good judgment is

not the girl who slavishly adopts the new styles and fads of the day

regardless of whether they are becoming to her individually or not. This

applies also to the way she dresses her hair.

There is no part of a toilet that influences the effect of the whole

more than the hair. The most becoming gown fails in its function if the

hair is tousled or dressed unbecomingly. Many girls fail to realize how

they may overcome some of Nature's faults and shortcomings and how they

may counteract the effect of bad features and proportions by the correct

use of line when dressing the hair.

If "ear muffs" become stylish, the little round-faced girl who knows

nothing of art or design as related to herself must bulge her hair over

her ears whether it makes a full moon of her face or not. Girls should

dress in style but styles should be modified to suit each individual.

The hair is a frame for the face. The delicate blonde and the strenuous

athletic brunette may no more wear the same coiffure than they may

safely wear the same colors. A miniature and an oil painting would

certainly not be framed alike.

The slender girl with a narrow face and thin neck should be most careful

with the use of line around her face. Hair combed in on the cheeks and

high and back from the forehead will make more evident her slenderness.

A hard neck line or chains and ties repeating the point of her chin will

make it appear more angular. Soft flowing lines in the hair, worn low on

the forehead and back from the cheeks, should be adopted.

The round-faced girl should conscientiously avoid coiffures which

broaden the proportions of her face, also neck lines and beads that

repeat the curve of her chin.

[Four small illustrations:

  1. Lines of Hair and Neck Increase Point of Face

  2. Flowing Lines for Narrow Face

  3. Face Made Broader by Hair and Neck Line

  4. Successful Coiffure for Broad Face]

Suggestions for the Stout Figure

A girl may not only improve the appearance of her face and head by the

proper use of line but she may do wonders with her figure, as well, if

she knows how to properly design her dresses. A dress wonderfully

becoming to a slender sylphlike girl may become a tragedy on her plump

classmate. Every girl should understand her physical make-up as

thoroughly as she does her disposition, with its strong points and its

weaknesses. She should know the kind of line she may wear successfully

in her dresses, and the colors that are most becoming to her and the

types of materials most suitable for her.

The stout girl should carefully avoid a design in a dress that is too

cut-up or complicated. Tunics, unless long and scant, are unfortunate

usually and the interest created by trimming about the waist line or

elaborate belts should never be indulged in by the stout girl.

Length-producing lines should always be planned and light or colored

collars should always be designed so that interest will not be created

out towards the sides of the figure, creating width, but down the center

front instead.

Contrasting shoes and stockings not only cut from the height of the

figure but help to accent the feet and ankles of the wearer. The girl

who wears white shoes with her dark dress states, by so doing, that she

considers her feet well worth public consideration.

Contrasting materials for sleeves or elaborate cuffs or pockets will add

width to any figure.

The designs in the accompanying illustration are most suitable for the

older school girl when made up of wool or linen materials.

I may safely recommend this type of line in design for the girl of

superfluous weight.

[Illustration: GOOD LINES FOR STOUT FIGURES]

Plaids and Figured Materials

Our stores in the early spring and summer show such fascinating plaid

and figured materials that I feel their use should be considered. Almost

everyone has fallen a victim to a wonderfully colored plaid on display,

to discover later that buying a plaid is a much simpler matter than

making it into a dress. Plaids are fatal for stout people. Area is the

impression always created by them and unless the pattern is very small

and the colors very soft and indefinite, they should be reserved for the

use of children and young girls. There is no colored costume that will

make a woman more conspicuous than one made of a large black-and-white

plaid material.

In selecting a pattern for a girl's plaid dress care should be used to

secure one with as few seams as possible. Every seam is a danger zone.

Only persons with great poise and power of concentration, if they notice

their surroundings at all, will be able to remain unaffected by a

conspicuous seam when the plaids "don't hit." Some plaids are designed

so that it is very difficult to match the pattern in the seams of the

skirt or a stretched selvedge will add to the difficulty. A gored skirt

pattern making bias seams necessary should never be used for plaid

material. Arm holes and shoulder seams should be carefully planned. A

kimona sleeve simplifies the arm-hole problem but will not prove so

satisfactory in a wash dress. Plain material, either white or colored,

makes a happy combination with plaids or figured material.

The accompanying designs are particularly becoming to slender girls. The

wide soft belts and collars and the contrasting materials in the sleeves

will seemingly add weight to slender young figures. In planning tucks

and band trimming for a skirt the result will be much more pleasing if

variety is used in the width of the bands and the spaces between the

bands.

[Illustration: PLAID AND FIGURED MATERIAL FOR SLENDER FIGURES]

Appropriate Clothes for the Street

If the school room is not an appropriate place for elaborate or fanciful

clothes, surely the street is less so. The truly refined woman will

never wear those things on the street that will make her conspicuous.

Here all classes of people meet and mingle, supposedly on business bent,

and the girl who appears in this public place in party clothes shows

either very poor judgment or that she is striving to attract public

attention in the cheapest possible way.

The most stylish girls seen in the city streets are those gowned in

simple well-made dresses or tailored suits. Hats, gloves, and shoes

should be as carefully considered as the dress itself and all should

harmonize.

A simple dark silk dress is almost an essential for street wear in

spring and summer, to replace the heavier suit or serge dress. Taffeta

is an excellent material for this dress and makes a much cooler and more

youthful dress than satin. A taffeta dress needs little trimming, if cut

on interesting lines. Buttons, tucks, and plaited frills of the same

material may be used most effectively. Little bits of hand embroidery or

attractive light collar and cuff sets add much charm to this type of

dress. Bright colors should not appear upon the street. A "loud" color

attracts attention as successfully as a loud noise. Any dark neutral

color becoming to the wearer is well for the street dress. Wool mixtures

and tweeds are particularly good for suits built on box or belted lines.

Sport clothes will give the young girl a wonderful opportunity for the

use of brilliant color. Dresses worn at home and for afternoon and

evening functions permit the use of delicate colors, more elaborate

trimming, and more perishable materials.

Remember that a hat should serve a double function. It should act as a

covering for the head, and its lines and color should enhance the

attractiveness of the wearer.

[Illustration: SIMPLE DESIGNS FOR TAFFETA STREET DRESSES]

The Graduation Dress

One of the most important events in the life of every girl is her

graduation, and we shall here consider the dress worn by her when she

has fulfilled all the requirements and that long-anticipated day

arrives. This occasion is not one for splendor and show, and the cue for

the girl graduate is modesty and simplicity. She is not supposed to be a

radiant queen bedecked for a festive occasion, but a charming young girl

equipped and ready to begin life as a young woman.

The simple and beautiful graduation dress of the past has assumed more

elaborate proportions during recent years until it has reached the point

where the students themselves realize that a halt must be called.

Georgettes, chiffons, and expensive nets have supplanted cotton weaves

and elaborate creations of lace and satin are not infrequent. The cost

of the dress itself is increased by such expensive accessories as long

white kid gloves, expensive slippers and stockings.

What is the girl whose parents possess only moderate means to do under

these conditions? Perhaps she is graduating with honors. Is she to be

embarrassed by having to play a Cinderella role by the side of her

gorgeously attired classmates or shall she strain the family bank

account and spend money for this ornate apparel that should be spent for

the education or maintenance of other members of her family?

Surely this is a time when the American girl may show her real spirit of

democracy. Instead of selecting a handsome dress, which she often

excuses by saying she wishes to use it afterwards for an evening dress,

she will choose a really more charming one made of less expensive

material, which will give her an opportunity to show her originality,

and make her personal charms more appreciated.

[Illustration: (No. B 820) ORGANDY GRADUATION DRESS (No. B 822)]

Patterns for these dresses may be secured at the College of Industrial Arts.

In many high schools the unfairness of an expensive graduation dress has

been so much appreciated by the students that a price limit has been set

for the graduation outfit, and the girl who violates this understanding

is considered a real offender. The girls who have initiated this have

been, in many cases, those girls who could best afford the expensive

garments and by such acts they have demonstrated that they are to make

the splendid American women of the future, who will lead in those

movements that bring about the greatest good to the greatest number.

I feel that organdy leads all other materials as desirable for the

graduation dress. It is a trifle more expensive than some other possible

materials but its sheerness and crispness give character to the dress,

making little trimming necessary. A dress of this material may be worn

for quite a while, as a little pressing always revives its freshness.

There are some qualities of flaxon that rival organdy as a desirable

material, and a dress of this may be laundered with perfect safety.

If lace is used on the graduation dress, do not sacrifice quality for

quantity. A small amount of good lace skillfully used will make a much

handsomer garment than one festooned with rows of a cheap quality. A

self-trimmed organdy dress is very distinctive. Dainty little frills and

pin tucks may be used in many interesting ways, and they may be planned

so as to be becoming to almost any figure.

Daintiness should be the characteristic quality of the graduation dress.

It is always disappointing to see elaborate jewelry worn with these

charming frocks. In many cases the most valued possessions of the family

have been collected for the occasion and this borrowed finery always

makes a discordant note in the harmony of the young wearer's costume.

Under no consideration substitute imitation jewelry for the genuine

article.

[Illustration: (No. B 824) ORGANDY GRADUATION DRESS (No. B 833)]

Patterns for these dresses may be secured at the College of Industrial Arts.

How to Secure Patterns of These Dresses

The College of Industrial Arts, in its efforts to be of service to the

girls and women of Texas, has made it possible for those desiring

patterns of the graduation dresses illustrated in this bulletin to

secure them through the Department of Extension of the College.

The original designs of these dresses were made by highly trained

artists at the College, whom we feel appreciate the particular needs of

Texas girls and women. The patterns were cut from these original designs

by the Vogue Pattern Company of New York, and are sold at thirty cents

each, their exact cost to the College. An illustration, material

requirement, and approximate cost are given with each pattern, and they

are cut in sizes 14, 16, and 18. When ordering patterns state the number

of the pattern and the size desired.

The quaint little design B 820 will appeal to the young girl who likes a

touch of originality in her clothes. The becoming fichu and full skirt

of this design seem to belong to the Colonial days with powdered hair

and patches. This design, created of organdy, should cost from $5.00 to

$8.00 according to the material selected. No. B 822 will prove more

expensive on account of the lace trimming, the approximate cost being

from $9.00 to $12.00. If interesting materials are chosen, this loose

peplum and snug ribbon girdle will make quite a distinctive costume,

becoming to stout figures.

The long-waisted design B 824 is decidedly original and its dainty

frills and ribbons appeal to young girls. A dress may be made by this

pattern of good materials for $8.00.

Design B 826 shows a clever interpretation of the narrow skirt so

popular today. The tiny tucks and frills make a dainty and inexpensive

trimming, and the costume should cost from $4.00 to $6.00.

No. B 828 demonstrates that vertical ruffles may be used successfully.

This dress is beautiful when sheer material is used and the ruffles are

picoted and plaited. It should cost about $6.00.

The slender girl who is not too thin through the bust is charming in

design B 833. The organdy sash and flounced peplum are designed

particularly for her. From $6.00 to $8.00 should buy the material for

this dress.

[Illustration: (No. B 828) ORGANDY GRADUATION DRESS (No. B 826)]

Patterns for these dresses may be secured at the College of Industrial Arts.

Lingerie for the Graduation Dress

The garment worn directly under the graduation dress has much to do with

the effect of the dress itself. This garment should not be picked up at

random but the fullness of its skirt and the design around the neck

should be planned to suit the particular dress pattern selected.

Underwear is to the dress what the foundation is to a house, and it

should be built just as skillfully. It is impossible to secure a dainty

graceful effect in a dress when it is worn with a clumsy petticoat.

Styles change in underwear just as they do in dresses and the silhouette

of the outer garment must decide what the lines of the under one shall

be. For the present styles soft yielding materials are absolutely

necessary for underwear and few flounces should be used about the bottom

of the skirt if the clinging effect around the ankles and knees is

desired in the dress.

Elaborate lace trimmings are neither in good taste nor stylish, and

handwork constitutes the decoration on many of the most attractive of

these garments. Colored lingerie and bright-colored ribbons should be

worn only when the dress is not transparent. Bright pink and blue

ribbons in a camisole or chemise will always look a bit garish when

viewed through a thin blouse.

Color has a magnetic attraction for the eye and wherever placed

immediately attracts attention to that spot. I am sure refined girls do

not wish to invite public interest in their lingerie through the use of

bright colors in their ribbons. The most delicate tints are permissible,

but should be used only in small quantities. White only should be used

with the graduation dress.

Since several petticoats are apt to prove clumsy, great care must be

exerted in selecting the material for this undergarment, to avoid too

much transparency when worn under the very sheer organdy dress.

[Illustration: LINGERIE FOR THE GRADUATION DRESS]

Corsets and Posture

The envelope chemise and knickerbockers are very comfortable

undergarments and are quite popular with most young girls of today. They

may be made most attractive when soft dainty materials are used and the

needlework is carefully executed. These garments should be kept quite

simple. If lace is used it should be in limited quantities and of a kind

that may be laundered often. Little bits of dainty feather stitching and

hand embroidery will add individual charm to these undergarments.

Style depends not only upon the proper selection of clothes but very

largely upon the way these clothes are put on and worn. Many girls

wearing beautiful clothes are decidedly "not stylish." Their clothes

look as though they had fallen upon their owners. This is caused by the

fact that the wearer does not carry herself well, or has not good poise.

Nothing is so vitally necessary for good health and good looks as good

posture. The slouchy, humped-over girl is unattractive enough when

young, but when she develops into a misshapen woman with superfluous

flesh about the abdomen and shoulders the most skillful artist will be

unable to disguise her deformities. The girl with the debutante slouch

or the one who "sits in her corsets" is rarely graceful. The uncorseted

figure is the popular one today but if corsets must be worn they should

be most carefully selected. Fortunately the long, unyielding coats of

mail of several years ago are now rarely seen on girls, and soft,

flexible girdles leaving the figure with its natural lines and grace,

have appeared as substitutes. A well-shapen brassiere is often necessary

with these low-busted girdles.

A stylish girl has good poise. This means that she stands well, walks

well, carries her head high, her shoulders back, and looks the world in

the face. The clothes worn by this girl will take the correct swing.

[Illustration: ENVELOPE AND KNICKERBOCKER CHEMISE]

Shoes and Feet

[Illustration: "Shoes and Feet" showing an image of "Good unspoiled

American feet," and "A bunion is in the bone."]

All organizations and publications keenly interested in the welfare of

young women are making a strenuous effort to produce better American

feet, and this is to be done directly through the shoes worn by our

girls. The Y. W. C. A. during the war discovered that lack of endurance

among girls could be traced back directly to misshapen feet, flattened

arches, weak backs and abdominal muscles. In almost every case these had

been caused by wearing high-heel shoes.

The human body is built and strung so that a person may walk and stand

with natural grace and ease. When the equilibrium of this delicate

mechanism is disturbed by inserting a spindle heel directly under that

point responsible for most of the human weight, it is not surprising

that physical ails result that must be carried through life.

A French or spindle heel is absolutely inconsistent for any occasion

when walking or standing is to be done and is certainly not artistic

when worn with a tailored dress or suit. Vanity, gratified by a foot

that seemingly is a bit smaller, should not compensate for the loss of

good health, good sense, natural grace and efficiency. An elaborate

evening dress may call for a higher heel than the one worn on the

street, but it will not excuse the wabbly spindle heels sold girls by

many ruthless concerns.

***